# Thesis

## Étude de l'évolution des gènes codant les protéines de transduction des signaux intracellulaires chez les animaux
**Floriane Picolo**
*8 december 2023* 

## Abstract
The evolution of species is linked, among other things, to the evolution of their genome. The biological function of proteins encoded by genes makes them susceptible to influences from other genes, particularly those that encode partner proteins. Although we have a growing understanding of the organization of genes within genomes, it is important to note that genes can be changed, lost, or born, particularly through gene or genome duplications. In the context of signaling pathways, interactions between gene products are of particular importance because they are carefully regulated and ordered. The main goal of this thesis was to answer two questions: first, how have animal signaling pathways evolved over time? Second, within a group of vertebrate species that have undergone three or four complete genome duplications (WGD), have the genes involved in these pathways remained in two or three copies (duplicate or triplicate), or have they returned to a single copy (singleton)? The results of this study show that among the 47 pathways examined, 24 of them evolved bottom-up, that is, they emerged from the end of the pathway (of the transcription factor) towards the upstream (ligands and receptors), while 10 pathways followed an opposite scenario, developing from upstream to downstream. Furthermore, these same genes generally remained in two copies in species having undergone three complete genome duplications, and are even present in triplicate or more in species having undergone four complete duplications, among the teleost clade. These results suggest that the evolution of signaling pathways occurred in a non-random manner in the evolutionary history of animal genomes.
**Keyword** : *evolution, phylogeny, signaling transduction, whole genome duplication, teleosts*